ASSIGNMENT:
Name - Saurav gudia 
Module 1 – Overview of IT Industry

(1)	What is program ?
      A program is a list of instructions that a computer   follows to do something.

    •	LAB EXERCISE: Write a simple "Hello World" program in two different programming languages of your choice. Compare the structure and syntax.

Html :
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html>
  <head>
    <title>Hello Page</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <h1>Hello, World</h1>
  </body>
</html>

    •	THEORY EXERCISE: Explain in your own words what a program is and how it functions. What is Programming?

    A program is a list of instructions that a computer follows to do something.
   
    Think of it like a recipe — it tells the computer step-by-step what to do.
     
     Example: A program might tell the computer to show your name, do math, or play a video.

 (2)	What is Programming?

     Programming is the process of writing those instructions for the computer.
    
     You use special languages like Python or JavaScript to tell the computer exactly what to do.

    •	What are the key steps involved in the conprogramming process?

Understand > Plan > Code >Test > Fix > Improve.

 (3)	Types of Programming Languages:

      Python, Java, Html, Css, C#

    •	THEORY EXERCISE: What are the main differences between high-level and low-level programming languages?
     
     Low language is complex to understand because it contains hard to readblility for humans and high level programming language is yet                easy to understand and Contains good redability .
       
 (4)   World  wide web:

World wide web created by tim berners lee on 1989
And it’s purpose is Information exchange platform.
     
 & How internet works:

     The internet is a network that lets computers and devices talk to each other to share information quickly

    • lab exercise: Research and create a diagram of how data is transmitted from a client to a server over the internet ?

client > internet > Router > server

 (5) Network layers on client and server:


    •THEORY EXERCISE: Explain the function of the TCP/IP model and its layers.

      TCP/IP model is like a set of rules that helps computers talk to each other over the internet.
It breaks the process into 4 simple steps application layer , transport layer , internet layer , network access layer


 (6) client & server:

     
    •THEORY EXERCISE: Explain Client Server Communication:
      
      Client-server communication is when a client sends a request, and a server responds with the needed information.

 (7) Types of internet connection :

    •LAB EXERCISE: Research different types of internet connections (e.g., broadband, fiber, satellite)
and list their pros and cons.

1. Broadband 
Description: High-speed internet over telephone lines or cable TV lines.
Pros: Widely available in cities and towns, Usually affordable, Stable for most everyday tasks
Cons: Slower than fiber, Speed may drop during peak hours, Distance from provider affects DSL speed

2. Fiber Optic
Description: Uses light through glass fibers to transmit data – the fastest internet option.
Pros: Super fast download and upload speeds, Reliable and stable connection, Great for streaming, gaming, and large file transfers
Cons: More expensive than other types, Not available in many rural areas

3. Satellite
Description: Internet from satellites in space, useful in remote areas.
Pros: Works almost anywhere, even in rural or remote places, Easy to set up without cables
Cons: Slower speeds and higher delay, Affected by weather, Data limits can be strict

4. Mobile Data 
Description: Internet via cellular networks on phones or mobile hotspots.
Pros: Portable – works anywhere with mobile signal, Fast with 4G or 5G in cities, No cables needed
Cons: Can be expensive, Speed depends on signal strength, Not always reliable in rural areas.

  (8) why is version control is important in software development ?

      Version control serves as a safety net to protect the source code from irreparable harm, giving the development team the freedom to experiment without fear of causing damage or creating code conflicts.

  (9) what are benifits for using GitHub for students?
       
      GitHub helps students learn coding, collaborate on projects, and build a professional portfolio—all while using real-world development tools for free.

  (10) what are key difference between web applications and desktop application ?
       
       web applications
	A program that runs in a web browser and needs the internet to work, like Gmail or Facebook.
       desktop application
        A program you install on your computer that works directly on your device, like Microsoft Word or Photoshop.
	
	






   





 



